so the next segment is going to be about
statistic
parsing so the techniques using
statistical parsing are not
significantly different at least for the
time being from the ones used in
deterministic parsing there will be
still based on dynamic programming and
techniques like CKY and early but
they'll be based on a different kind of
grammar so the grammar that we're going
to look at now is called the
probabilistic context-free grammar it
looks very similar to a context-free
grammar but it has probabilities
associated with each of the rules so
first of all let's look at the need for
probabilistic parsing why do we need to
do this okay the classic example that
we've had before words time flies like
an arrow and we decided that there are
many different parses it can be
associated with this particular sentence
however not all of them are equally
feasible as English languages English
language sentences some of them are
clearly more likely than others so we
need to have some way to rank them based
on a score and since we're using a score
why not just use probabilities and that
turns out to be the best approach so
what is the definition of a context-free
grammar it looks very similar to a
deterministic one it's a four tuple and
Sigma R and s where n is the set of non
terminal symbols things like a noun
phrase prepositional phrase and so on
Sigma R the terminal symbols things like
the words like cat and 8 and so on and
now the rules the rules are different
from deterministic context-free grammar
we have a which is a non-terminal symbol
producing beta which is a string that
can combine both terminals and
non-terminals
however we now have a probability P that
is associated with this whoa and one
important thing to keep in mind is that
the rules that have the same left-hand
side should have their probabilities add
up to one and the start symbol is the
same as before it's one of the non
terminals typically the sentence s so
here's an example of a set of a
context-free grammar that we had before
and another
example we can now split the rules with
the same left-hand side on separate
lines and assign probabilities to each
of them this is typically done using one
of two possible techniques one is by
hand just to look at all the holes that
have the same left-hand side and
determine what percentage of those
should follow on the right-hand side
another way to do this is by using
training based on maximum likelihood
estimates from a corpus
so here I've used alternate boldface and
non boldface to indicate the same last
hand sides of the rules so p0 is going
to be associated with the whole s goes
to NP VP and in particular the
probability here is going to be equal to
1 because there's only one hole with the
same left-hand side s p1 and p2
belong to the same category they have
the same last grain size symbol noun
phrase therefore the sum of those two
numbers p1 and p2 should also be equal
to 1 the third set of rules is for
prepositional phrases the probability P
3 here is equal to 1 because there's
only one way to expand PP and so on and
so forth so now let's see how we can
compute the probability of a parse tree
given a sentence and a grammar so the
probability of a parse tree T is based
on all the production's used to build it
let's assume that there n such
productions so we're just going to
multiply the probabilities of those
productions to form the probability of
the parse tree and the most likely parts
of a given sentence given a specific
context probabilistic context-free
grammar is determined as follows it's T
among all the possible T's associated
with a sentence that maximizes the
probability P of T or mathematically
speaking it's our max of the probability
of T for all the T's in the set of trees
consistent with s now if we want to
compute the probability of a sentence
that would be the sum of the
probabilities of all of its parses so
here's a specific example we have t1 is
one possible parse tree
associated with the sentence in this
grammar and we have t2 another possible
parse just to remind you the difference
between the two is that in the first one
with the fork attaches to the verb and
in the second case it attaches to the
noun
so now we can use the formula on the
previous slide to determine the
probability of t1 well t1 is equal to p0
which is the probability as going to NPV
p times p-1
which is the probability of NP going to
dt n times p 4 and so on so it's a long
sequence of probabilities that have to
be multiplied together
similarly the probability of T 2 is
equal to p0 which is the same as in the
previous example as goes to n P VP
followed by P 1 because n P goes to DT
and in both cases but then we have P 5
and P 7 and so on so you can see that
some of those probabilities are the same
in both cases and some are different now
if you want to compute the more likely
of the two parse trees we just have to
find out which probabilities are
different everything else is irrelevant
to the comparison so P Zero appears in
both cases we can drop it from the
comparison and so on we can do the same
thing for every other pair of matching
probabilities P 1 P 4 P 7 and so on so
after we cross those out we're going to
have only two probabilities remaining P
2 in the top tree and P 5 in the bottom
tree so it really hinges on the
difference between those two to
determine which of the trees is more
likely so P 2 is associated with the NP
goes to n P P P production and P 5 is
associated with VP goes to V P P P so
whichever one of those is more likely
the more likely the matching parse is
going to be so there are many different
things that we can do with probabilistic
context-free grammars I'm going to list
some of them here and later we're going
to discuss some of the others so given a
grammar G and a set assess let T of s be
all the parse trees that correspond to s
so task one is going to be to find which
tree among all those T's maximize the
ability P of T and the second task is to
find the probability of the sentence P
of s as the sum of all the possible trip
probabilities P of T the second part is
very important when you train a
probabilistic context-free grammar
because you need those numbers to
estimate some of the maximum likelihood
probabilities okay now let's see once we
have defined probabilistic context-free
grammars what techniques exists for
parsing sentences populistic aliy well
we have an early algorithm before for
deterministic grammars we can similarly
have a probabilistic early algorithm
that is a top-down parser just like
before with a dynamic programming table
we can also have a probabilistic koke
kisame younger algorithm which is a
bottom up parser with a dynamic
programming table just like before
what's new here is that the programming
dynamic programming table is going to
take into account the probabilities of
the different productions so how do we
learn the probabilities well they're
typically trained from a corpus like the
penn treebank what is the meaning of the
different probabilities well if we have
a probability that is twice as large as
another one that should somehow roughly
indicate at that specific parse for the
one that is associated with the first
one which is twice as probable as the
one for the second part and it's now
possible to do some sort of we Hankey we
can have many different parcels
associated with a given sentence and
then figure out what additional
properties those parses would have and
we can decide to pick one that is not
doesn't have the largest probability in
the generative process and we can
combine the output of the probabilistic
Parkson with some other stage for
example we can have an overall
probability that takes into account not
just the probability of the parts but
also the probability of the correct
speech recognition and the probability
of the machine translation so let's see
how we can estimate the probabilities
from a corpus this is done using a
method called maximum likelihood we use
it in the following way we look at the
purse training set to get some counts of
this form so the count alpha
produces better / the count of alpha so
for example there may be 10 instances of
noun phrases but only six of them have
noun phrase producing and followed by PP
so and followed by PP is in the
numerator here and + P is in the
denominator so if we divide 6 by 10
we're going to get the maximum
likelihood estimate of this probability
is 0.6 okay so he is not example in this
case the who is s goes to add P VP we
want to divide the number of times s
produces NP VP by the number of times s
appears okay so this is an example from
the ATS grammar from giraffe's Gilmartin
a this is the domain of airline
reservations as you can see the first
three goes on the last hand side or have
the same left-hand side s goes to end
PvP with a probability of 80% as goes to
exhilarate on face verb phrase with the
probability of 15% and finally the
remaining probability mass of 0.05 is
assigned to the row s goes to VP so
similarly in every group of transitions
where the left hand side has the same
symbol we have a sum of the probability
is equal to one and this also applies to
the right hand side of this picture
where we have the lexicon the lexicon is
also probabilistic we have the category
determiner that includes team words the
articles there and our with
probabilities of point six and point
three respectively and then another
determiner that with a probability of
0.1 so now with those probabilities we
can compute the probability of a
specific parse tree using the
probabilistic version of the CKY
algorithm so the chart is exactly the
same as before we have to start with the
parts of speech of the individual words
but we now have to associate their
probabilities with them as well so let's
start with the word da the wood is a
determiner and it's probability
0.75 the probability of child as a noun
is 0.5 and now when we combine those two
into a noun phrase determinate noun
we're going to have to multiply three
numbers the probability of determiner
the probability of noun and also the
probability of noun phrase turning into
determinant now so that's point eight
times 0.5 times point 75 and I'm not
going to finish this example but you can
fill in the rest of the box is exactly
the same way as we did in the
deterministic example and at the end of
the day we want to get an S in the top
right-hand box and whatever
probabilities are associated with s
there will be the probabilities of the
corresponding parse trees and if you
want to compute the probability of the
entire set as s would have to add the
probabilities of the different parse
trees that lead to s so here's a
question for you can you compute the
probability of the entire sentence using
probabilistic CKY by following the steps
that I just described and you can do
this for homework assignment just some
hints don't forget that there may be
multiple parcels so you need to add the
corresponding probabilities so this is
the end of this segment the next segment
is going to talk about method called
lexicalized parsing